Azure Private Link (#15)
redpanda-data/cloud-docs: modules/networking/pages/azure-private-link.adoc

= Configure Azure Private Link with the Cloud API
:description: Set up Azure Private Link to securely access Redpanda Cloud.

include::shared:partial$feature-flag.adoc[]

> The Redpanda Azure Private Link service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own VPC. Traffic over Azure Private Link does not go through the public internet because a Private Link connection is treated as its own private Azure service. While your VPC has access to the Redpanda VPC, Redpanda cannot access your VPC.

Reviewer: VPC → VNet

> Traffic over Azure Private Link does not go through the public internet because a Private Link connection is treated as its own private Azure service

Traffic over Azure Private Link does not go through the public internet but through Microsoft's backbone network. It is also unidirectional, clients can initiate connections against the Redpanda Cloud cluster endpoints but not vice-versa.  

(Something like that, obviously using your style manual)

> Consider using Private Link if you have multiple VPCs and could benefit from a more simplified approach to network management:

Reviewer: I wouldn't say it is a more simplified network management, it is for sure a more secure network management.

* Private Link allows overlapping xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR ranges] in VPC networks.
* Private Link does not limit the number of connections.
After <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token,getting an access token>>, you can <<create-new-byoc-cluster-with-private-link-enabled,enable Private Link when creating a new BYOC cluster>>, or you can <<enable-private-link-on-an-existing-byoc-cluster,enable Private Link for existing BYOC clusters>>.

== Requirements

* In this guide, you use the xref:deploy:deployment-option/cloud/api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to enable the Redpanda Private Link service for your clusters. Follow the steps on this page to <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token, get an access token>>.
* Use the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/[Azure CLI^] to authenticate with Azure and retrieve the Private Link service credentials.

== Get a Cloud API access token

include::networking:partial$private-links-api-access-token.adoc[]

> == Specify subscriptions

Reviewer: Since Redpanda Cloud also has the concept of Subscription, we should qualify their mentions more to avoid confusions. Here, it could be for example: Specify Azure subscriptions.

> // https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/how-to-approve-private-link-cross-subscription

Author: Is this the correct Azure doc that we can link out to in case the reader wants more details on the Azure side?

Reviewer: to know more in general about Azure Private Links? I would instead point them to the index: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/

> Set the Azure subscriptions you want to use for the Private Link connection. :

Reviewer: good, my suggestion about the title is irrelevant since we are qualifying it already here.

[,bash]
----

> export AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<subscription-id-1>

Author: These two subscriptions are provided by the customer?

Reviewer 2: Yes

Reviewer: I'm not following, what's `subscription-id-1` referring to? same question for `subscription-id-2`

export AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<subscription-id-2>
----

== Create new cluster with Private Link service enabled

> . In the https://cloud.redpanda.com/[Redpanda Cloud UI], go to **Resource groups** and select the resource group in which you want to create a cluster.

Reviewer: This is another potential point of confusion. Redpanda Cloud and Azure share common concepts: 

* Resource Groups
* Subscription 

It would be ideal to clarify somewhere that these resources groups are Redpanda resource groups and will not have any manifestation whatsoever in their Azure tenant as resource groups.

NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AZURE",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "name": "<private-link-network-name>",
    "cidr_block": "<10.0.0.0/20>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "region": "$REGION"
}
EOF`

NETWORK_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/networks | jq .metadata.network_id`

echo $NETWORK_ID
----
+
Wait for the network to be ready before creating the cluster in the next step. You can check the state of the network creation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/networks/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/networks/\{id}`]. You can create the cluster when the state is `STATE_READY`.

. Create a new cluster with the Private Link service enabled by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/clusters[`POST /v1beta2/clusters`].
+
In the example below, make sure to set your own values for the following fields:
+
--
- `name`
- `tier`: for example, `tier-1-azure`
- `type`: `TYPE_BYOC` for BYOC clusters
- `zones`: for example, `"uksouth-az1",  "uksouth-az2", "uksouth-az3"`

> - `allowed_subscriptions`: 

Reviewer: name or UUID? I believe it is UUID, it looks like a miss in the variable name we should probably complement with docs.

. Call the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/clusters/\{id}`] endpoint to check the service status and retrieve the connection ID, DNS name, and Redpanda Console URL to use.
+
[,bash]
----
DNS_RECORD=`curl -s -X GET \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq -r ".cluster.azure_private_link.status.dns_a_record"`

PRIVATE_SERVICE_ID=`curl -s -X GET \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq -r ".cluster.azure_private_link.status.service_id"`

CONSOLE_URL=`curl -s -X GET \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq -r ".cluster.redpanda_console.url"`

echo $DNS_RECORD
echo $PRIVATE_SERVICE_ID
echo $CONSOLE_URL

----

. Ensure you have logged into Azure and set the subscription ID to the value you set for `AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID`:
+
[,bash]
----
az login
az account set --subscription $AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID
----

> . Pull the latest cloudv2 code and run Terraform to create a VM inside the Private Link subscription:

Author: Are we providing the cloudv2 code for GA? I think we had done something similar for GCP (share Terraform modules) but in the docs we ended up providing steps using gcloud to set up the infrastructure https://docs.redpanda.com/redpanda-cloud/networking/gcp-private-service-connect/

Reviewer 2: I would change this to just: "Run Terraform to create a VM inside the Private Link subscription:"

+
[,bash]
----
cd tools/azure-private-link/terraform

> export MYGROUP=your-rg-group

Reviewer 2: `export REGION=your-rg-group-region`

terraform init
cat << EOF > terraform.tfvars

> region = "uksouth"

Reviewer 2: `region = "$REGION"`

resource_group_name = "$MYGROUP"
rp_endpoint_service_id = "$PRIVATE_SERVICE_ID"
rp_id = "$RP_ID"
rp_domain = "$DNS_RECORD"
rp_node_count = 3
EOF

terraform apply -var-file="terraform.tfvars"

# when the terraform completes

VM_IP=$(terraform output -raw instance_public_ip)
KEY_PATH=$(terraform output -raw private_key_file_path)

echo $USER
echo $PASS
echo "brokers.${DNS_RECORD}:30292"
echo $VM_IP
echo $DNS_RECORD
echo $PRIVATE_SERVICE_ID
echo $CONSOLE_URL

cat << EOF 
Copy and paste this after sshing in:

export USER=$USER
export PASS=$PASS
export CONSOLE_URL=$CONSOLE_URL
export BROKERS=brokers.${DNS_RECORD}:30292

EOF
----

> == Access Redpanda services through VPC endpoint

Author: The code examples that follow don't quite follow the preceding Terraform/cloudv2 code step because these are single sourced, under the assumption that this experience should be the same across different providers. Will need to confirm [re: Terraform](https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-docs/pull/15/files#r1704202970) and then we can streamline the code snippets accordingly.

= Configure Azure Private Link with the Cloud API

> :description: Set up Azure Private Link to securely access Redpanda Cloud.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:description: Learn how to configure private networking for BYOC clusters on Azure.
```

Reviewer 3: to be consistent with the AWS and GCP descriptions. Also, until we have VPC peering for Azure and a folder for Azure, maybe change the title to Azure: Configure Private Link with the Cloud API, so it looks better here? 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/02eee537-bba8-4a01-92e3-04855ea7b49f)

The Redpanda Azure Private Link service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own virtual network. Traffic over Azure Private Link does not go through the public internet, but instead through Microsoft's backbone network. While clients can initiate connections against the Redpanda Cloud cluster endpoints, Redpanda Cloud services cannot access your virtual networks directly.

> Consider using Private Link if you have multiple virtual networks and require more secure network management:

Reviewer 3: I think this should probably end with a period and the bulleted list put in a note. But if you do that, you should probably update the AWS page similarly.

* Private Link allows overlapping xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR ranges] in virtual networks.
* Private Link does not limit the number of connections.

> After <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token,getting an access token>>, you can <<create-new-cluster-with-private-link-service-enabled,enable Private Link when creating a new cluster>>, or you can <<enable-private-link-service-for-existing-cluster,enable Private Link for existing clusters>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token,getting an access token>>, you can <<create-new-cluster-with-private-link-service-enabled,enable Private Link when creating a new cluster>>, or you can <<enable-private-link-service-for-existing-clusters,enable Private Link for existing clusters>>.
```

TIP: Make sure to replace the variable values in the code examples on this page with your own values, before running the commands in the terminal or in a script.

== Requirements

> * You will use the xref:deploy:deployment-option/cloud/api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to enable the Redpanda Private Link service for your clusters. Follow the steps on this page to <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token, get an access token>>.
> * Install xref:manage:rpk/rpk-install.adoc[`rpk`].
> * You will use the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/[Azure CLI^] to authenticate with Azure and configure resources in your Azure account.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Install xref:manage:rpk/rpk-install.adoc[`rpk`].
* You will use the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/[Azure CLI^] to authenticate with Azure and configure resources in your Azure account.
* You will use the xref:deploy:deployment-option/cloud/api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to enable the Redpanda Private Link service for your clusters. Follow the steps on this page to <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token, get an access token>>.
```
Suggest putting that item last and removing the link for get an access token, since it'll flow right into it.

> Learn more about Azure Private Link in the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/private-link-service-overview[official Azure documentation].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To learn more about Azure Private Link, see the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/private-link-service-overview[Azure documentation].
```

== Set up Redpanda Private Link Service

=== Get a Cloud API access token

include::networking:partial$private-links-api-access-token.adoc[]

=== Specify Azure subscriptions

Set the Azure subscriptions you want to use for the Private Link connection.

> Replace these placeholder variables:
> - `<azure-subscription-id>`: The ID of the subscription where the Redpanda cluster will be provisioned.
> - `<azure-private-link-subscription-id>`: The ID of the subscription from where you will initiate connections to the Private Link service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Replace these placeholder variables:

* `<azure-subscription-id>`: The ID of the subscription where the Redpanda cluster will be provisioned.
* `<azure-private-link-subscription-id>`: The ID of the subscription from where you will initiate connections to the Private Link service.
```

[,bash]
----
export REDPANDA_CLUSTER_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<azure-subscription-id>
export SOURCE_CONNECTION_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<azure-private-link-subscription-id>
----

> If you have not yet created a cluster in Redpanda Cloud, go to the <<create-new-cluster-with-private-link-service-enabled,next section>> to create a Private Link-enabled cluster. If you already have a cluster, see the steps to <<enable-private-link-service-for-existing-clusters,enable Private Link>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have not yet created a cluster in Redpanda Cloud, <<create-new-cluster-with-private-link-service-enabled,create a Private Link-enabled cluster>>. If you already have a cluster, <<enable-private-link-service-for-existing-clusters,enable Private Link>>.
```

=== Create new cluster with Private Link service enabled

> . In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to https://cloud.redpanda.com/resource-groups[**Resource groups**^] and select the Redpanda Cloud resource group in which you want to create a cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to https://cloud.redpanda.com/resource-groups[**Resource groups**^] and select the Redpanda Cloud resource group in which you want to create a cluster.
```
Instead of starting at Resource Groups, why not have them start at Clusters, select a resource group and then save the `rg=xxx` in the URL?

Author: @micheleRP I'm not sure if I'm following -- if I start on the Clusters page, clicking anywhere on the row in the list of clusters still takes me to the cluster overview first, and the ID in the URL is the cluster ID. Seems like extra steps/clicks than just going straight to Resource groups?

Reviewer 3: So this section is about how to create a new cluster with PL enabled, and when you open [cloud.redpanda.com](https://cloud.redpanda.com/) you land on the Clusters page with a **Create cluster** button. So in my head, that seems like where you'd intuitively start. But if they're only opening the UI to find the resource group ID and not actually create the cluster, then maybe your path is best. Especially if they need to create a new resource group instead of selecting an existing resource group. And there is an extra step in my path to select BYOC. But I also like how the url in my path shows

Author: @micheleRP Ah yes they just need the resource group ID here! I do think it might still be a bit too much switching between terminal and UI -- I _think_ there is a way to programmatically either grab an existing resource group ID using the shell or create a new group then save that new ID, but I don't have those at hand for now so we could add that in as a future update to this doc if that sounds OK.

+
Copy and store the resource group ID (UUID) from the URL in the browser.
+
[,bash]
----
export RESOURCE_GROUP_ID=<uuid>
----    

. Call xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/networks[`POST /v1beta2/networks`] to create a Redpanda Cloud network for the cluster.
+
Make sure to supply your own values in the following example request. Store the network ID (`network_id`) after the network is created to check whether you can proceed to cluster creation.
+
--
- `network-name`
- `cidr_block`
- `azure-region`
--
+
[,bash]
----
REGION=<azure-region>

NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AZURE",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "name": "<network-name>",
    "cidr_block": "<10.0.0.0/20>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "region": "$REGION"
}
EOF`

NETWORK_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/networks | jq .metadata.network_id`

echo $NETWORK_ID
----
+

> Wait for the network to be ready before creating the cluster in the next step. You can check the state of the network creation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/networks/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/networks/\{id}`]. You can create the cluster when the state is `STATE_READY`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Wait for the network to be ready before creating the cluster in the next step. Check the state of the network creation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/networks/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/networks/\{id}`]. You can create the cluster when the state is `STATE_READY`.
```

. Create a new cluster with the Private Link service enabled by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/clusters[`POST /v1beta2/clusters`].
+
In the following example, make sure to set your own values for the following fields:
+
--
- `name`

> - `tier`: for example, `tier-1-azure`. See available Azure tiers in the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#api-description[Cloud API reference]. To learn more about tiers, see xref:reference:tiers/byoc-tiers.adoc[BYOC Tiers and Regions]. 
> - `zones`: for example, `"uksouth-az1",  "uksouth-az2", "uksouth-az3"`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `tier`: For example, `tier-1-azure`. See available Azure tiers in the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#api-description[Cloud API reference]. To learn more about tiers, see xref:reference:tiers/byoc-tiers.adoc[BYOC Tiers and Regions]. 
- `zones`: For example, `"uksouth-az1",  "uksouth-az2", "uksouth-az3"`
```

  "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
  "name": "<name>",
  "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
  "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
  "region": "$REGION",
  "throughput_tier": "<tier>",
  "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
  "zones": [ <zones> ],
  "azure_private_link": { 
      "allowed_subscriptions": ["$SOURCE_CONNECTION_SUBSCRIPTION_ID"],
      "enabled": true,
      "connect_console": true
  }
}
EOF`

CLUSTER_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters | jq .operation.metadata.cluster_id | sed 's/"//g'`

echo $CLUSTER_ID
----

. Check that the cluster operation is completed by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from the Create Cluster call.
+
When the Create Cluster operation is completed (`STATE_COMPLETED`), run the following `rpk cloud` command to finish setting up your BYOC cluster with Private Link enabled:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cloud byoc azure apply --redpanda-id=$CLUSTER_ID --subscription-id=$REDPANDA_CLUSTER_SUBSCRIPTION_ID
----

> . See next steps to <<configure-azure-private-link-connection-to-redpanda-cloud,configure the Private Link connection to Redpanda>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Continue to <<configure-azure-private-link-connection-to-redpanda-cloud,configure the Private Link connection to Redpanda>>.
```

. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to the cluster overview and copy the cluster ID from the **Details** section.
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_ID=<cluster_id>
----

. Make a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#patch-/v1beta2/clusters/-cluster.id-[`PATCH /v1beta2/clusters/{cluster.id}`] request to update the cluster with the service enabled.
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_PATCH_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "azure_private_link": { 
      "allowed_subscriptions": ["$SOURCE_CONNECTION_SUBSCRIPTION_ID"],
      "enabled": true,
      "connect_console": true
  }
}
EOF`

curl -vv -X PATCH \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -d "$CLUSTER_PATCH_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID
----

. Before proceeding, check the state of the Update Cluster operation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from the Update Cluster call. When the state is `STATE_READY`, proceed to the next step to <<configure-azure-private-link-connection-to-redpanda-cloud,configure the Private Link connection to Redpanda>>.

== Configure Azure Private Link connection to Redpanda Cloud

> . In the Cloud UI, go to https://cloud.redpanda.com/users?tab=users[**Users**^] and create a new user to authenticate the Private Link endpoint connections with the service. You will need the username and password to <<connect-to-redpanda-services-through-private-link-endpoint,access Redpanda services>> or <<test-the-connection,test the connection>> using `rpk` or cURL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to https://cloud.redpanda.com/users?tab=users[**Users**^] and create a new user to authenticate the Private Link endpoint connections with the service. You will need the username and password to <<connect-to-redpanda-services-through-private-link-endpoint,access Redpanda services>> or <<test-the-connection,test the connection>> using `rpk` or cURL.
```

= Configure Azure Private Link with the Cloud API
:description: Set up Azure Private Link to securely access Redpanda Cloud.

include::shared:partial$feature-flag.adoc[]

The Redpanda Azure Private Link service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own virtual network. Traffic over Azure Private Link does not go through the public internet, but instead through Microsoft's backbone network. While clients can initiate connections against the Redpanda Cloud cluster endpoints, Redpanda Cloud services cannot access your virtual networks directly.

Consider using Private Link if you have multiple virtual networks and require more secure network management:

* Private Link allows overlapping xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR ranges] in virtual networks.
* Private Link does not limit the number of connections.

> After <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token,getting an access token>>, you can <<create-new-byoc-cluster-with-private-link-enabled,enable Private Link when creating a new BYOC cluster>>, or you can <<enable-private-link-on-an-existing-byoc-cluster,enable Private Link for existing BYOC clusters>>.

Reviewer 3: @kbatuigas When you're done writing, please check these links to get the latest headings. Right now the 2nd & 3rd links need fixing.

== Requirements

> * In this guide, you use the xref:deploy:deployment-option/cloud/api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to enable the Redpanda Private Link service for your clusters. Follow the steps on this page to <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token, get an access token>>.
> * Use the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/[Azure CLI^] to authenticate with Azure and retrieve the Private Link service credentials.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* You will use the xref:deploy:deployment-option/cloud/api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to enable the Redpanda Private Link service for your clusters. Follow the steps on this page to <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token, get an access token>>.
* You will use the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/[Azure CLI^] to authenticate with Azure and retrieve the Private Link service credentials.
```

== Get a Cloud API access token

include::networking:partial$private-links-api-access-token.adoc[]

== Specify Azure subscriptions

> Set the Azure subscriptions you want to use for the Private Link connection:

Reviewer 3: I think singular subscription here. Would you do this with multiple subscriptions?

[,bash]
----
export AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<redpanda-cluster-subscription-id>
export AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<source-connection-to-redpanda>
----

> - `<redpanda-subscription-id>`: Use the ID of the subscription where the Redpanda cluster will be provisioned.
> - `<source-connection-to-redpanda>`: Use the ID of the subscription from where you will initiate connections to the Private Link service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `<redpanda-subscription-id>`: The ID of the subscription where the Redpanda cluster will be provisioned.
- `<source-connection-to-redpanda>`: The ID of the subscription where you will initiate connections to the Private Link service.
```

== Create new cluster with Private Link service enabled

> . In the https://cloud.redpanda.com/[Redpanda Cloud UI], go to **Resource groups** and select the Redpanda Cloud resource group in which you want to create a cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. In the https://cloud.redpanda.com/[Redpanda Cloud UI^], go to **Resource groups** and select the Redpanda Cloud resource group in which you want to create a cluster.
```

+
NOTE: Redpanda Cloud resource groups exist in your Redpanda Cloud account only. They do not correspond to Azure resource groups and do not appear in your Azure tenant.
+
Copy and store the resource group ID (UUID) from the URL in the browser.
+
[,bash]
----
export RESOURCE_GROUP_ID=<uuid>
----    

. Call xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/networks[`POST /v1beta2/networks`] to create a network.
+

> Make sure to supply your own values in the example request below. Store the network ID (`network_id`) after the network is created in order to check whether you can proceed to cluster creation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Make sure to supply your own values in the following example request. Store the network ID (`network_id`) after the network is created to check whether you can proceed to cluster creation.
```

+
--
- `name`
- `cidr_block`
- `azure-region`
--
+
[,bash]
----
REGION=<azure-region>

NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AZURE",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "name": "<private-link-network-name>",
    "cidr_block": "<10.0.0.0/20>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "region": "$REGION"
}
EOF`

NETWORK_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/networks | jq .metadata.network_id`

echo $NETWORK_ID
----
+
Wait for the network to be ready before creating the cluster in the next step. You can check the state of the network creation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/networks/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/networks/\{id}`]. You can create the cluster when the state is `STATE_READY`.

. Create a new cluster with the Private Link service enabled by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/clusters[`POST /v1beta2/clusters`].
+

> In the example below, make sure to set your own values for the following fields:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following example, make sure to set your own values for the following fields:
```

  "azure_private_link": { 
      "allowed_subscriptions": ["$AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID"],
      "enabled": true,
      "connect_console": true
  }
}
EOF`

CLUSTER_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters | jq .operation.metadata.cluster_id | sed 's/"//g'`

echo $CLUSTER_ID
----

. Check that the cluster operation is completed by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from the Create Cluster call.
+
When the Create Cluster operation is completed (`STATE_COMPLETED`), run the following `rpk cloud` command to finish setting up your BYOC cluster with Private Link enabled:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cloud byoc azure apply --redpanda-id=$CLUSTER_ID --subscription-id=$AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID
----

. Wait for the cluster to be in a Running state in the UI. Once it is running, fetch the Redpanda credentials.
+
[,bash]
----
az login 
az account set --subscription $AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID
az aks get-credentials -g rg-rpcloud-$CLUSTER_ID -n aks-rpcloud-$CLUSTER_ID

> secret=$(kubectl get secret redpanda-superusers -n redpanda -o jsonpath='{.data.users\.txt}' | base64 --decode)

Author: @c4milo @ncole is kubectl also a requirement for the user?

Reviewer: No, AKS internals should not be exposed to customers. They have to use Redpanda Console to create their first user and use that.

IFS=':' read -r user password sasl <<< "$secret"

export USER=$user
export PASS=$password
----

== Enable Private Link service for existing clusters

. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to the cluster overview and copy the cluster ID from the **Details** section.
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_ID=<cluster_id>
----

. Make a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#patch-/v1beta2/clusters/-cluster.id-[`PATCH /v1beta2/clusters/{cluster.id}`] request to update the cluster with the service enabled.
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_PATCH_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "azure_private_link": { 
      "allowed_subscriptions": ["$AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID"],
      "enabled": true,
      "connect_console": true
  }
}
EOF`

curl -vv -X PATCH \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -d "$CLUSTER_PATCH_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID
----

> . Before proceeding, check the state of the Update Cluster operation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from Update Cluster call. When the state is `STATE_READY`, proceed to the next step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Before proceeding, check the state of the Update Cluster operation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from the Update Cluster call. When the state is `STATE_READY`, proceed to the next step.
```

== Configure Private Link connection to Redpanda Cloud

. Call the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/clusters/\{id}`] endpoint to check the service status and retrieve the connection ID, DNS name, and Redpanda Console URL to use.
+
[,bash]
----
DNS_RECORD=`curl -s -X GET \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq -r ".cluster.azure_private_link.status.dns_a_record"`

PRIVATE_SERVICE_ID=`curl -s -X GET \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq -r ".cluster.azure_private_link.status.service_id"`

> CONSOLE_URL=`curl -s -X GET \

Author: @c4milo @ncole when does the user need or when will they use the console URL?

    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq -r ".cluster.redpanda_console.url"`

echo $DNS_RECORD
echo $PRIVATE_SERVICE_ID
echo $CONSOLE_URL

----

> . Ensure you have logged into Azure and set the subscription ID to the value you set for `AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Check that you have logged into Azure and set the subscription ID to the value you set for `AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID`:
```

+
[,bash]
----
az login
az account set --subscription $AZURE_PRIVATE_LINK_SUBSCRIPTION_ID
----

// https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/pull/12/ needs to be merged

> . Run Terraform to create a virtual machine (VM) inside the Private Link subscription. You may clone the Redpanda Cloud examples https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples[repository^] and run the following code, or modify the example and write your own module if you like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Run Terraform to create a virtual machine (VM) inside the Private Link subscription. You can clone the Redpanda Cloud examples https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples[repository^] and run the following code, or modify the example and write your own module:
```

+
[,bash]
----
cd customer-managed/azure/private-link/terraform

# Write Terraform variables out to a file

export MYGROUP=<rg-group>

terraform init
cat << EOF > terraform.tfvars
region = "$REGION"
resource_group_name = "$MYGROUP"
rp_endpoint_service_id = "$PRIVATE_SERVICE_ID"
rp_id = "$CLUSTER_ID"
rp_domain = "$DNS_RECORD"
rp_node_count = 3
EOF

cd terraform
terraform init
terraform apply -var-file="terraform.tfvars"

# When Terraform completes execution, export values to variables

VM_IP=$(terraform output -raw instance_public_ip)
KEY_PATH=$(terraform output -raw private_key_file_path)
----

== Access Redpanda services through Private Link endpoints

After you have enabled Private Link for your cluster, your connection URLs are available in the *How to Connect* section of the cluster overview in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

> If you followed the previous step to run Terraform, you can also run the following to retrieve Private Link connection details, and then SSH into the VM that was created. From there, run the `rpk` commands provided in the <<test-the-connection,next section>> to test the connection:

Reviewer: We clarified this during a Slack huddle but for the record. SSH access is not required to setup this feature.

[,bash]
----
echo $USER
echo $PASS
echo "brokers.${DNS_RECORD}:30292"
echo $VM_IP
echo $DNS_RECORD
echo $PRIVATE_SERVICE_ID
echo $CONSOLE_URL

cat << EOF 
Copy and paste this after sshing in:

> export RPK_USER=$USER

Author: @c4milo @ncole ok to add the `RPK_` prefix to `USER` and `PASS`?

export RPK_PASS=$PASS

> export CONSOLE_URL=$CONSOLE_URL

Author: @c4milo @ncole should `CONSOLE_URL` have the `RPK_` prefix here as well? I don't see it being used in the rest of the code examples that follow

export RPK_BROKERS=brokers.${DNS_RECORD}:30292

EOF

ssh -i $KEY_PATH redpanda@$VM_IP
# When prompted, paste and enter the output from the previous command
----

include::networking:partial$private-links-access-rp-services-through-vpc.adoc[]

== Test the connection

You can test the Private Link connection from any VM or container in the consumer virtual network. If configuring a client isn't possible right away, you can do these checks using xref:ROOT:get-started:rpk-install.adoc[`rpk`] or cURL:

include::networking:partial$private-links-test-connection.adoc[]

Optional: When you have completed testing, you can tear down the Terraform-managed resources by running:

[,bash]
----
terraform destroy -var-file="terraform.tfvars"
----

> include::shared:partial$suggested-reading.adoc[]
> 
> * xref:networking:dedicated/vpc-peering.adoc[]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
Suggest deleting this. Azure does not support VPC peering yet, or Dedicated
